Earth

Earth is a planet. A very special planet. As far as scientists know it is the only planet with complex life in the galaxy and maybe even the universe. It's the only planet with all the elements in perfect harmony being able to support life. In order for a planet to sustain complex life it must have water. Earth has no shortage on water. 71% of the Earth's surface is water. Earth's temperature is not too hot or too cold, stable enough to support the development of complex life. The Earth's unique atmosphere is responsible of such stable temperatures. It is composed of 77% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, with traces of argon, carbon dioxide and water vapour. The oxygen in the atmosphere sustains life, and the carbon dioxide supports it making the Earth 35C hotter with something called the greenhouse effect. 

Earth  is the 3rd planet from the Sun. This position is vital to sustain complex life. It keeps the Earth warm and cool. To stay warm however it is pretty close to the Sun. Not as close as the deadly and barren Venus and Mercury however. Being so close to the Sun the Earth is in a dangerous position of taking strong radiation hits from the sun known as solar flares. Earth however has very strong core for a planet with its size and position from the sun. It is the most dense planet in pur solar system. This core creates a magnetic field blocking the solar flares from hitting the Earth. We see this in the form of the Northern Lights at the poles of the Earth.

The Earth surface may contain a lot of water, but it also contains huge land masses known as continents. These continents were once one continent, known as Pangaea. The continents spliting up takes millions of years. That seems like a long time, but it is not. That is like minutes in space terms. Earth itself is a very young planet teaming with lushes and deadly environents all sustaining complex life. Planet Earth is really the true meaning of a miracle.

Jupiter

Jupiter is a planet, but more specifically it falls under the class of gas giant. Jupiter is made up of gas. Jupiter is about 90% hydrogen ans 10% helium, with traces of methane, water, ammonia, and "rock". Jupiter does however have a core like the other planets. Its core may be made out of a rocky material amounting to about 10 to 15 Earths. Jupiter is the biggest planet of the solar system. It can fit 1321 Earths inside itself.

Jupiter has high velocity winds, not surprising from a planet made of gas. These winds are confined in in wind bands. Thw winds blow in opposite directions. The slight chemical and temperature differences between the bands are responsible for the bands to be coloured. The light coloured bands are called zones, and the dark ones are called belts. The winds travel at a mind blowing pace; 400mph, and that's just the surface! Headed towards the interior the winds is estimated to travel thousands of kilometers.

There is a big red spot on the planet. It may look like it came with the planet, but it did not. That spot is called the Great Red Spot, it has been seen by Earthly observers for more than 300 years. The Great Red Spot is big enough to hold two Earths.

The radiation Jupiter emits is more that the radiation it receives from the Sun. Jupiter generates heat. The core is about 30000C. This heat is generated by the Kelvin-Helmholtz mechanism. This mechanism states that that when the planets surface cools the core heats up.

Jupiter is as big as can be. If Jupiter had more mass it would be compressed by gravity. A star can only be larger becuase of its internal heat source. In order for Jupiter to gedt bigger it would have to have a hotter core. That would mean that JUpiter would have to be at least 80 times more massive.

Jupiter is named approprately after the King of the Gods. This planet is massive and effects the entire solar system with its presence.

Mars

Much of the Martian surface is very old and cratered, but there are also much younger rift valleys, ridges, hills and plains. Mars is very similar to Earth. Though Mars is not as big, its smaller, but its surface area is about the same as the land surface of Earth.

Mars is essentially a failed Earth. Mars is now an old dying planet. Millions of years ago Mars had lushes jungles and rivers, but Mars just wasn't fit to sustain those factors that could of led to complex life, like it did on Earth. It failed because of its location from the sun and its size. Earth at it's early stages of creation used up all of its carbon dioxide to form carbonate rocks. But lacking Earth's plate tectonics, Mars if unable to recycle any of its carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, and cannot sustain the greenhouse effect. This caused Mars to be cold. Mars also lost its atmospeher from it lack of size. With not enough gravity Mars' atmosphere slowy leaked into space. Mars is now dry barren wasteland.

Mercury

Mercury is the closest planet to the Sun. Its temperature ranges are the most extreme in the solar system. Mercury is a strong and old planet. Its surface is heavily cratered and has no plate tectonics unlike the Earth. Mercury is the second most dense planet in the solar system, after the Earth.

Mercury's atmosphere is very thin consisting of atoms blasted off its surface by the solar wind. Because Mercury is so hot, there atoms quickly escape into space. Thus in contrast to the Earth and Venus whose atmosphere are stable, Mercury's atmosphere s constantly being replenished.

Mercury is one of the first known spacial objects. It can be easily spotted from Earth. However Earthly observers do not know much about it. And with good reason, Mercury is practically hugging the sun. There was no surprise once probes gathered information on the planet. It was nothing more than a dry planet.Mercury stole our hearts, and was named appropiately.

Neptune

After the discovery of Uranus, is was noticed that its orbit was not as it should be in accordance with Newton's laws. It was predicted that another distant planet must be disturbing Uranus' orbit. The disturbance was the mysterious planet of Neptune.

Neptune is a gas giant. Neptune has only been visited once by Earthly obeservers. It was by the Voyager 2 on August 25 of 1989. All we know of Neptune is from this one encounter. The Voyager 2 spotted something very similar to Jupiter. A big spot. This spot if known as the Great Dark Spot, it about half as big as Jupiter's. Winds at the spot blow at 700mph. The Voyager 2 also saw a smaller dark spot and a small irregular white cloud that zips around Neptune every 16 hours, this is known as "The Scooter." Like the planet itself "The Scooter" is a mystery. In 1994  the Great Dark Spot seemed to dissapear! It is either over or being covered up by other layers of the atmosphere. A few months later another spot appeared. Scientists concluded that Neptune's atmosphere changes rapidly, perhaps due to slight changes in the temperature difference between the tops and bottoms of the clouds.

Saturn

Saturn is a gas giant. Immediately Saturn is recognized by it rings. All gas giants however have rings. Saturn lost its identity went the feint rings of the other gas giants were discovered in 1977. From a Earth the rings look continuous, the rings arehowever actually composed of innumerable small particles. The particles seem to be composed of water ice, but they may also include rocky particles with icy coatings.

Saturn was visited by NASA's Pioneer 11 in 1979 and later by the Voyager 1 and 2. Cassini arrived on July 4, 2004 and still orbit Saturn to this day.

Saturn is the least dense of all the planets. Like Jupiter Saturn is about 75% hydrogen ans 25% helium with traces of water, methane, ammonia, and "rock". Saturn's interior is similar to Jupiter's consisting of a rocky core. Traces of ice are also present. Like Jupiter Saturn emits more radiation than it receives from the Sun.

At night Saturn is visible from Earth, easily with the unaided eye. Though it isn't as bright as jupiter, it is easy to identify as a planet doesn't "twinkle" lile stars do. 

Saturn may have lost its identity. but many don't know that. The rings that orbit Saturn are prominent than the other rings, there not barely visible like the others. Still Saturn will be known the the planet with the rings.

Uranus

Uranus is the ancient Greek deity of the Heavens, the earliest supreme God. Thus you wouldn't want to pronounce the name wrong. It is not "your anus" or "urine us", but "yoor-a-nus". Uranus was the first planet to be discovered in modern times by William Herschel on March 13, 1781. It had been noticed many times before, but was always passed as a another star.

Most planets spin on an axis nearly perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic. Uranus' axis is unique however and is almost parrallel to the ecliptic. The ecliptic is the apparent path that the Sun traces out in the sky during the year. This awkward position means that Uranus' polar regions receive more energy input from the Sun than its equatorial regions. Oddly enough however Uranus is hotter at its equator than at its poles.

Like other gas giants Uranus is composed of primarily rock and various ices. Uranus' atmosphere is about 83% hydrogen, 15% helium, and 2% methane. Like the other gas giants bands of clouds blow around rapidly. With Uranus however they are faint. Recently however the bands are becoming more pronounced, further observations show more pronounced bands. This is a result of seasonal effects since the Sun is now low at a Uranian latitude which may cause more pronounced day/night effetcs. In 2007 the Sun rose high enough to be directly over Uranus' equator.

Uranus' magnetic field is odd in that it is not centred on the centre of the planet and is tilted almost 60 degrees because of its axis of rotation.

Uranus is a very diffent planet in our solar system, and is under going changes that make it a prime target for more astronomical research.

Venus

Venus, the goddess of love and beauty. The planet is named this because it is the brightest of the planets.

The first spacecraft to visit Venus was the Mariner 2 in 1962. Venus had many more visitors, over 20!

Venus' rotation is somewhat unusual in that it is very slow. It rotation takes 243 Earth days, and it revolves around the sun every 225 days. Technically Venus' days are longer than its years.

Venus is sometimes recognized as Earth's sister: it is only slightly smaller, both have young surfaces, and their densities and chemical compositions are similar. Because of these similarities mankind really thought Venus was teaming with life. We thought Venus was sustaining life similar to Earth's prehistoric ages. It was hard to tell because of Venus think atmosphere. We knew the truth after a probe, the Venera 7, landed on Venus and revealed the truth. Venus was a acidic, boiling environment, a very hostile environment. 

Like Mars Venus had it all and lost it all. Mars got cold, but Venus got too hot. Water boiled away. Pictures from the Venera 7 showed Venus' surface to be covered by lava.

Venus like every planet is unique, it has no magnetic field; it may be becuase of its slow rotation.

On June 8 2004, Venus passed directly between the Earth and the Sun, appearing as a large black dot travelling across the Sun. This event if known as a "transit of Venus" and is very rare; the last one was in 1882, the next one is in 2012, then 2117.

The Sun

The Sun, a burning oven of unlimited energy. It's just a star, like all the other billions of stars twinkling in the night sky. Ou solar sytem however support life. And every object in it plays a role. The Sun by far play the biggest role, this isn't any ordinary star, this is the Sun. The Sun is the perfect size. Not too big or too small. This small factor allows the Sun to live long enough and provide the right environment for life to be supported.

Currently the Sun is about 70% hydrogen and 28% heium by mass everything else amounts to less than 2%. This chnages slowly over time as the Sun converts hydrogen to helium in its core. The conditions at the Sun's core are extreme. The temperature is 15000000 Kelvin. At the centre the Sun's density is more than 150 times that of water.

The Sun produces unimaginable power, about 386 billion billion megaWatts. This power is produces by nuclear fusion. Each second 700000000 tons of hydrogen are converted to about 695000000 tone of helium abd 5000000 tones of energy in the form of gamma rays. As it travels to the surface, the energy is continuourly being absorbed and re-emitted at lower and lower temperatures, and by the time it reaches the surface it becomes visible light. The Sun has a very powerful and complex maginetic field being able to hold our solar sytem together and effect it in still mysterious and unknown ways.

In addition to light and heat, the Sun also emits a low density stream of charged partcles known as solar winds. Solars winds have dramitic effects on Earth ranging from power outages to radio interference and the Northern Lights.

The Sun is about 4.5 billion years old. Since its birth it has used up about half of the hydrogen in its core. It will continue to radiate for another 5 billion years or so. Eventually however the Sun will run out of hydrogen fuel. It will then be forced into radical changes which will result in the total destruction of the Earth.



